1. Cortex. 2023 Dec 27;172:54-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2023.11.018. Online ahead
 of print.

Contributions of listening effort and intelligibility to cortical tracking of 
speech in adverse listening conditions.

Ershaid H(1), Lizarazu M(2), McLaughlin D(3), Cooke M(4), Simantiraki O(5), 
Koutsogiannaki M(6), Lallier M(7).

Author information:
(1)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain. 
Electronic address: h.ershaid@bcbl.eu.
(2)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain. 
Electronic address: m.lizarazu@bcbl.eu.
(3)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain. 
Electronic address: d.mclaughlin@bcbl.eu.
(4)Ikerbasque, Basque Science Foundation, Bilbao, Spain. Electronic address: 
m.cooke@ikerbasque.org.
(5)University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain. Electronic address: 
olympia.simantiraki@ehu.eus.
(6)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain. 
Electronic address: m.koutsog@gmail.com.
(7)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain; 
Ikerbasque, Basque Science Foundation, Bilbao, Spain. Electronic address: 
m.lallier@bcbl.eu.

Cortical tracking of speech is vital for speech segmentation and is linked to 
speech intelligibility. However, there is no clear consensus as to whether 
reduced intelligibility leads to a decrease or an increase in cortical speech 
tracking, warranting further investigation of the factors influencing this 
relationship. One such factor is listening effort, defined as the cognitive 
resources necessary for speech comprehension, and reported to have a strong 
negative correlation with speech intelligibility. Yet, no studies have examined 
the relationship between speech intelligibility, listening effort, and cortical 
tracking of speech. The aim of the present study was thus to examine these 
factors in quiet and distinct adverse listening conditions. Forty-nine normal 
hearing adults listened to sentences produced casually, presented in quiet and 
two adverse listening conditions: cafeteria noise and reverberant speech. 
Electrophysiological responses were registered with electroencephalogram, and 
listening effort was estimated subjectively using self-reported scores and 
objectively using pupillometry. Results indicated varying impacts of adverse 
conditions on intelligibility, listening effort, and cortical tracking of 
speech, depending on the preservation of the speech temporal envelope. The more 
distorted envelope in the reverberant condition led to higher listening effort, 
as reflected in higher subjective scores, increased pupil diameter, and stronger 
cortical tracking of speech in the delta band. These findings suggest that using 
measures of listening effort in addition to those of intelligibility is useful 
for interpreting cortical tracking of speech results. Moreover, reading and 
phonological skills of participants were positively correlated with listening 
effort in the cafeteria condition, suggesting a special role of expert language 
skills in processing speech in this noisy condition. Implications for future 
research and theories linking atypical cortical tracking of speech and reading 
disorders are further discussed.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2023.11.018
PMID: 38215511